---
layout: post
draft: true
---

The most common and intuitive methodology that languages and their ecosystems provide to verify the logical correctness of applications is automated testing. All modern languages that I'm aware of have libraries for writing and tooling to run automated tests, but this problem is not yet solved. Software developers are embroiled in wide-ranging religious wars of _what_ should be tested and _how_ those tests should function.

In my mind, the answer to these questions are clear: A test should impersonate a user of the system and verify the expected output as a user would. If your application is used by human beings with their web browsers, then your tests should open a web browser and click, scroll, and type as a human would. If your application is a software library, then your tests should emulate an application that pulls yours in as a dependency and verify that it does what it purports to do. When designing your tests, ask "Who are my users?", "How will they interact with my application?", and "What do they expect to happen?".

A programming language and/or its ecosystem should provide tooling and libraries for ensuring logical correctness as described here.

There is also another way in which programming languages can aid developers in writing logically correct programs: encouraging clarity[^2]. This topic is deep enough to warrant its own blog post (one is planned! 😀), but at a high level what I mean by clarity is "the ability for another developer to understand a piece of code". One aspect of this is that a developer should be able to understand how an application works such that they have a high degree of confidence that it is logically correct. As has been pointed out a multitude of times before, code has two readers: the machine and other developers. Both are important.

I believe that a language's tooling can _and should_ guide developers towards writing more comprehensible code, and this is an area that I am still actively exploring.
